STOP THE BLEEDING (MEASURE B)

Section I. GENERAL 4-1. Important of Preventing Loss of Blood

The open wound is the most common condition whiclt requires your Inst aid assistance. Acute loss of blood may lead to shook, and shock may lead to death; therefore, you muat act immediately to
pievent loss of blood.

4-2. Methods to Control Bleeding

The use of the pressure dressing is the preferred method for controlling severe bleeding. Elevation of the wounded limb an<l application of digital pressure should also be used, as appropriate, in conjunction with the pressure dressing. The tourniquet can be used to control bleeding from a limb. It should not be used, however, unless a pressure dressing has failed to stop the bleeding.

Section IJ. APPLICATION OF PRESSURE DRESSING, ELEVATION

OF LIMB, AND DIGITAL PRESSURE 4-3. General

The application of a sterile tiressing with pressure to a bleeding wound heli)s clot formation, compresses the oi>en blood vessels, and protects the wound from further invasion of germs.

4-4. Searching for Entrance and Exit Wounds

Before applying the pressure diessing, examine the soldier in determine whether there is more than one wound. For example, a missile may have entered at one point and come out at another point. The exit wound is usually larger than the en( ranee wound.

29 4—5. Removing the Clothing

('lit thp c'lotliiiiK niid liH. it awny from the wouthI to nvo'ul further ootitaniitiiition. ToiiriiiK the (ilothiii^ miKht result in rou^li handling of the injured part. Do not tt. h the wound; keep it as clean as possible. Jf it is alrea<ly ditty, leave it that way. Uo not try to clean it in any way.

©

©

PRESSURE APPLIED TO WOUND
WITH BAWriAGES ATTACHED TO DRESSING

ADDITIONAL PRESSURE APPLIED
TO WOUND WITH HAND

ADDfTIOHAL PREiSURE APPLIED TO WOUND WITH THICK PAO(RAG) FIRHLY SECURED WITH CRAVAT OR OTHER STRIP OF MATERIAL

Figure i-1. Application of Presaure dressing.

30 4-6. Covering the Wound and Applying Pressure a. Cover the wound with a field first aid dressing (individual) and
apply pressure to the wound by using tlie bandage strips attached to the dressing (a, b, c, fig 4-1).

b. If additional pressure is required to stop the bleeding, place your hand over the dressing and press hard <d, fig 4-1). Pressure fi-' m your hand may be required for 5 to 10 minutes to allow the clot to form. The clot must be strong enough to hold with the help of only the dressing and bandage strips when your hand is removed. Additional pressure can also be apphed by placiiig a thick pad on top of the original dressing at the site of the wound and fumiy securing this pad with a cravat oi strip of material (e and f, fig 4-1). Do not remove any dressings or bandages once they are placed over the wound. Apply any additional dressings over the ones in place. Removing a dressing may dislodge clots which are partially formed.

4-7. Elevating the Limb

Frequently, bleeding can be lessened by raising the injured pait above the level of the heart; however, direct pressure must be continued. Elevation must not be used if there is a broken bone in the injured part. Moving an unsplinted fracture causes pain, can increase shock, and may further damage nerves, muscles, and blood vessels- 4-6. Applying Digital Pressure

If blood is spurting from the wound (arterial bleeding), digital pressure can be used to control the bleeding until a pressure dressing can be unwrapped and applied. Digital pressure is applied to a pressure point with the fingers, the thumbs, or the hands. A pressure point is the site at which a main artery supplying the wounded area lies near the skin surface or over a bone. By passing at this point, the flow of blood from the heart to the wound is shut off or at least slowed down (fig 4-2). You will have proi>erly located a pressure point when you can feel the pidse at this point. You must feel the pulse before api)lyirig the digital jjreasure.

Section IIL APPLICATION OF TOURNIQUET 4—9. General

A tourniquet is a constricting band placed around an arm or leg to stop severe bleeding.

31

WOUND OF

LOWER FACE

(BELOW EYES)

WOUND OF
LOWER LEG

Figure i-S. Pressure points in the circulatory system for temporary control of arterial bleeding.

33 a. The tourniquet should be used only when pressure over the
wound area, pressure over the appropriate pressure point, and elevation of the wounded part (if it is possible) fail to control the bleeding. Its use will rarely be necessary and should be avoided \f possible. Use of a tourniquet has on occasion been associated with injury to blood vessels and nerves. If it is left on too long, it can cause loss of an arm or leg.

b. Bleeding from a major artery of the thigh, lower leg, or upper arm or bleeding from multiple arteries, which occurs in a traumatic amputation, may prove to be beyond control by pressure. If the first aid dressing under hard hand pressure becomes soaked with blood and the wound continues to bleed, you should apply a tourniquet.

c. Once a tourniquet has been applied, it must stay in place; and the soldier must be taken to the nearest medical treatment faciUty as soon as possible.

d. Do not loosen a tourniquet after it has been applied and has stopped the bleeding. Shock and blood loss can result in death.

4—10. The Improvised Tourniquet

In the absence of a specially designed tourniquet, a tourniquet may be made from strong, soft, pliable material such as gauze or muslin bandage, clothing, or kerchiefs. An improvised tourniquet is used with a rigid stick-like object (fig 4-3). To minimize skin damage, insure that the improvised tourniquet is sufficiently wide to remain at least 1 inch in width after tightening.

4—1 1. Placing the Improvised Tourniquet a. Place the tourniquet around the limb and between the wound
and the body trunk (or between the wound and the heart) (fig 4-3). Place the tourniquet 2 to 4 inches above the injury. Never place it directly over a wound or fracture.

b. When possible, place the tourniquet over the smoothed sleeve or trouser leg to prevent the skin from being pinched or twisted (fig 4-3). Damaging the skin may deprive the surgeon of skin required to cover the amputation, thus forcing amputation of more of the limb than might otherwise be necessary, Pjotection of the skin reduces the pain.

4-12. Tighteing the Tourniquet a. Tighten the tourniquet as illustrated in figure 4-3. Tighten it
only enough to stop blood from passing under it. If a pulse can be 33

©

AROUND THE LIMB;
TIE WITH SQUARE
KNOT.

SQUARE KNOT

©

PASS A STICK,
SCABBARD, OR
BAYONET UNDER
THE LOOP.

TIGHTEN TOURNIQUET
JUST ENOUGH TO

STOP ARTERIAL

BLEEDING,

©

BIND FREE END
OF STICK TO
LIMB TO KEEP

TOURNIQUET
FROM UNWINDING

Figure 4-.T. Application of an improvised toumtqiiet to etop bleeding.

34 felt in the intact wrist or foot of the affected limb before the
tourniquet is applied, stoppage of this pulse can be used as the indicator that tourniquet pressure is sufficient.

b. To detect a pulse, place two fingers (not the thumb) over the pressure point in the wrist or ankle (fig 4-2). Do not use your thumb because the small arteries in your thumb may cause a faUe pulse reading. If such a pulse cannot be used as an indicaLoi', you must rely upon your judgment of reduction of blood flow from the wound. In this case, uncover the wound temporarily to observe the blood flow.

c. After a tourniquet is properly tightened, arterial (spurtmg) bleeding will immediately cease; but bleeding from veins (para ^
16) in the lower part of the hmb will continue until the vessels are drained of the blood already in them. Do -not continue to tighten the tourniquet in an attempt to stop this drainage.

4-13. Dressing the Wound

After the tourniquet has been secured in place, dress and bandage the wound (para 6-5).

4-14. Marking the Soldier

If the condition of the soldier or the weather makes it necessary to cover the soldier, leave the tourniquet exposed so that it can be readily seen. If possible, mark him with a T on his forehead and indicate the time that the tourniquet was appUed. Once a tourniquet has been applied, it must not be loosened by anyone except medical personnel.

35
